docs/dev/clone_ferc1.rst, before:

===============================================================================
Cloning the FERC Form 1 DB
===============================================================================

FERC Form 1 is special.

The :doc:`../data_sources/ferc1` is published in a particularly inaccessible format.
From 1994-2020 it used the proprietary `FoxPro database
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FoxPro>`__ binary format. Then in 2021 it switched to
`XBRL <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XBRL>`__, a dialect of XML used for financial
reporting.

In addition to using two difficult to parse and very different file formats, the data
itself is unclean and poorly organized. As a result, very few people are currently able
to use it. This means that, while we have not yet integrated the vast majority of the
available data into PUDL, it's useful to just provide programmatic access to the bulk
raw data, independent of the cleaner subset of the data included within PUDL.

To provide that access, we've broken the :mod:`pudl.extract.ferc1` process
down into several distinct steps:

#. Clone the 1994-2020 annual database from FoxPro (DBF) into a local
   file-based :mod:`sqlite3` database.
#. Clone the 2021 and later data from XBRL into another :mod:`sqlite3` database,
   with a different structure, derived from the
   `FERC Form 1 XBRL taxonomy <https://xbrlview.ferc.gov/yeti/resources/yeti-gwt/Yeti.jsp#tax~(id~8*v~72)!net~(a~143*l~35)!lang~(code~en)!rg~(rg~4*p~1)>`__.
#. Select a limited subset of the tables in these databases for further processing and
   integration into the PUDL :mod:`sqlite3` database.

The FoxPro / XBRL derived FERC Form 1 databases include 100+ tables, containing 3000+
columns.

If you want direct access to the original FERC Form 1 database, you can just do the
database cloning and connect directly to the resulting database. This has become
especially useful since Microsoft recently discontinued the database driver that until
late 2018 had allowed users to load the FoxPro database files into Microsoft Access.

In any case, cloning the original FERC database is the first step in the PUDL
ETL process. This can be done with the ``ferc_to_sqlite`` script (which is an
entrypoint into the :mod:`pudl.convert.ferc_to_sqlite` module) which is
installed as part of the PUDL Python package. It takes its instructions from a
YAML file, an example of which is included in the ``settings`` directory in
your PUDL workspace. Once you've :ref:`created a datastore <datastore>`, you can
try this example:

.. code-block:: console

   $ ferc_to_sqlite settings/etl_full.yml

This should create several outputs that you can find in your workspace at:

 * ``sqlite/ferc1.sqlite``: Data from 1994-2020 (FoxPro/DBF)
 * ``sqlite/ferc1_xbrl.sqlite``: Data from 2021 onward (XBRL)
 * ``sqlite/ferc1_xbrl_datapackage.json``: `Frictionless data package
   <https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/data-package/>`__ descriptor for the XBRL derived
   database.
 * ``sqlite/ferc1_xbrl_taxonomy_metadata.json``: A JSON version of the XBRL Taxonomy,
   containing additional metadata.

By default, the script pulls in all available years and tables of data. The output is
roughly 1GB on disk.

.. note::

    This script pulls *all* of the FERC Form 1 DBF data into a *single* database, but
    FERC distributes a *separate* database for each year. Virtually all the database
    tables contain a ``report_year`` column that indicates which year they came from,
    preventing collisions between records in the merged multi-year database. One notable
    exception is the ``f1_respondent_id`` table, which maps ``respondent_id`` to the
    names of the respondents. For that table, we have allowed the most recently reported
    record to take precedence, overwriting previous mappings if they exist.

.. note::

   There are a handful of ``respondent_id`` values that appear in the FERC Form 1
   database tables but do not show up in ``f1_respondent_id``.  This renders the foreign
   key relationships between those tables invalid.  During the database cloning process
   we add these ``respondent_id`` values to the ``f1_respondent_id`` table with a
   ``respondent_name`` indicating that the ID was filled in by PUDL.

Commit message:

Dagster ETL documentation (#2306)
* Start dagster release notes and unignore package_data subpackage for autoapi
* Add ferc1 release notes
* Flesh out run_etl docs
* Add check_pudl_fk command and docs
* Add env var setup to docs
* Add check_foreign_key script
* Move some dagster release notes to deprecated section
* Respond to some of Zane's dagster doc comments
* Address Austen's dagster docs comments
* Add grpcio to environment.yml to avoid dependency errors on M1 Macs.
* Give stronger guidance about using the new method, how to set environment variables, etc.
* Update clone_ferc1 to link to dagit explanation
* Remove clobber comment TODOs and have ferc ops return None
* Update docs to answer some confusing things:
  * What's the difference between ferc and normal ETL? Why is one materialize asset and the other launch run?
  * How do I configure the FERC run?
  * Does Dagster use the settings files?
  * What's the difference between DAGSTER_HOME and PUDL_OUT?
* Remove Makefile and add dagit alias
* Update docs: standardize on /output, make sure pudl_setup actually does what we say, clarify some assupmtions
* Update pudl_*put directory names

---------

Co-authored-by: Zane Selvans <zane.selvans@catalyst.coop>
Co-authored-by: Dazhong Xia <dazhong.xia@catalyst.coop>

docs/dev/clone_ferc1.rst, after:

===============================================================================
Cloning the FERC Form 1 DB
===============================================================================

FERC Form 1 is special.

The :doc:`../data_sources/ferc1` is published in a particularly inaccessible format.
From 1994-2020 it used the proprietary `FoxPro database
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FoxPro>`__ binary format. Then in 2021 it switched to
`XBRL <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XBRL>`__, a dialect of XML used for financial
reporting.

In addition to using two difficult to parse and very different file formats, the data
itself is unclean and poorly organized. As a result, very few people are currently able
to use it. This means that, while we have not yet integrated the vast majority of the
available data into PUDL, it's useful to just provide programmatic access to the bulk
raw data, independent of the cleaner subset of the data included within PUDL.

To provide that access, we've broken the :mod:`pudl.extract.ferc1` process
down into several distinct steps:

#. Clone the 1994-2020 annual database from FoxPro (DBF) into a local
   file-based :mod:`sqlite3` database.
#. Clone the 2021 and later data from XBRL into another :mod:`sqlite3` database,
   with a different structure, derived from the
   `FERC Form 1 XBRL taxonomy <https://xbrlview.ferc.gov/yeti/resources/yeti-gwt/Yeti.jsp#tax~(id~8*v~72)!net~(a~143*l~35)!lang~(code~en)!rg~(rg~4*p~1)>`__.
#. Select a limited subset of the tables in these databases for further processing and
   integration into the PUDL :mod:`sqlite3` database.

The FoxPro / XBRL derived FERC Form 1 databases include 100+ tables, containing 3000+
columns.

If you want direct access to the original FERC Form 1 database, you can just do the
database cloning and connect directly to the resulting database. This has become
especially useful since Microsoft recently discontinued the database driver that until
late 2018 had allowed users to load the FoxPro database files into Microsoft Access.

Cloning the original FERC database is the first step in the PUDL
ETL process. This can be done using the dagster UI (see :ref:`run-dagit`)
or with the ``ferc_to_sqlite`` script (see :ref:`run-cli`).

.. note::

  We recommend using Dagit to execute the ETL as it provides additional
  functionality for re-execution and viewing dependences.

Executing a ``ferc_to_sqlite`` job will create several outputs that you can
find in your workspace at:

 * ``pudl_output/ferc1.sqlite``: Data from 1994-2020 (FoxPro/DBF)
 * ``pudl_output/ferc1_xbrl.sqlite``: Data from 2021 onward (XBRL)
 * ``pudl_output/ferc1_xbrl_datapackage.json``: `Frictionless data package
   <https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/data-package/>`__ descriptor for the XBRL derived
   database.
 * ``pudl_output/ferc1_xbrl_taxonomy_metadata.json``: A JSON version of the
   XBRL Taxonomy, containing additional metadata.

By default, the script pulls in all available years and tables of data. The output is
roughly 1GB on disk. The ``ferc_to_sqlite`` jobs also extracts the XBRL data for FERC
Form 1, 2, 6, 60 and 714.

.. note::

    This script pulls *all* of the FERC Form 1 DBF data into a *single* database, but
    FERC distributes a *separate* database for each year. Virtually all the database
    tables contain a ``report_year`` column that indicates which year they came from,
    preventing collisions between records in the merged multi-year database. One notable
    exception is the ``f1_respondent_id`` table, which maps ``respondent_id`` to the
    names of the respondents. For that table, we have allowed the most recently reported
    record to take precedence, overwriting previous mappings if they exist.

.. note::

   There are a handful of ``respondent_id`` values that appear in the FERC Form 1
   database tables but do not show up in ``f1_respondent_id``.  This renders the foreign
   key relationships between those tables invalid.  During the database cloning process
   we add these ``respondent_id`` values to the ``f1_respondent_id`` table with a
   ``respondent_name`` indicating that the ID was filled in by PUDL.
