docs/dev/datastore.rst, before:

.. _datastore:

===============================================================================
Working with the Datastore
===============================================================================

The input data that PUDL processes comes from a variety of US government
agencies. However, these agencies typically make the data available on their
websites or via FTP without planning for programmatic access. To ensure
reproducible, programmatic access, we periodically archive the input files on
the `Zenodo <https://zenodo.org/communities/catalyst-cooperative/>`__ research
archiving service maintained by CERN. (See our `pudl-archiver
<https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl-archiver>`__ repository on GitHub
for more information.)

When PUDL needs a data resource, it will attempt to automatically retrieve it from
Zenodo and store it locally in a file hierarchy organized by dataset and the
versioned DOI of the corresponding Zenodo deposition.

The ``pudl_datastore`` script can also be used to pre-download the raw input data in
bulk. It uses the routines defined in the :mod:`pudl.workspace.datastore` module. For
details on what data is available, for what time periods, and how much of it there
is, see the PUDL :doc:`/data_sources/index`. At present the ``pudl_datastore`` script
downloads the entire collection of data available for each dataset. For the FERC Form
1 and EPA CEMS datasets, this is several gigabytes.

For example, to download the full :doc:`/data_sources/eia860` dataset
(covering 2001-present) you would use:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pudl_datastore --dataset eia860

For more detailed usage information, see:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pudl_datastore --help

The downloaded data will be used by the script to populate a datastore under
the ``data`` directory in your workspace, organized by data source, form, and
date::

    data/censusdp1tract/
    data/eia860/
    data/eia861/
    data/eia923/
    data/epacems/
    data/ferc1/
    data/ferc714/

If the download fails to complete successfully, the script can be run repeatedly until
all the files are downloaded. It will not try and re-download data which is already
present locally.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adding a new Dataset to the Datastore
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We maintain a tool at `pudl-archiver
<https://www.github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl-archiver>`__ that manages the
archival and versioning of datasets. See the `documentation
<https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl-archiver#adding-a-new-dataset>`__
for information on adding datasets to the datastore.


Prepare the Datastore
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have used pudl-archiver to prepare a Zenodo archive as above, you
can add support for your archive to the datastore by adding the DOI to
pudl.workspace.datastore.DOI, under "sandbox" or "production" as appropriate.

If you want to prepare an archive for the datastore separately, the following
are required.

#. The root path must contain a ``datapackage.json`` file that conforms to the
`frictionless datapackage spec <https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/data-package/>`__
#. Each listed resource among the ``datapackage.json`` resources must include:

   * ``path`` containing the zenodo download url for the specific file.
   * ``remote_url`` with the same url as the ``path``
   * ``name`` of the file
   * ``hash`` with the md5 hash of the file
   * ``parts`` a set of key / value pairs defining additional attributes that
     can be used to select a subset of the whole datapackage. For example, the
     ``epacems`` dataset is partitioned by year and state, and
     ``"parts": {"year": 2010, "state": "ca"}`` would indicate that the
     resource contains data for the state of California in the year 2010.
     Unpartitioned datasets like the ``ferc714`` which includes all years in
     a single file, would have an empty ``"parts": {}``

Commit message:

Allow a mix of Zenodo sandbox & production DOIs
Okay I did this off the clock since it has been driving me a little bit nuts.

Historically we've required that all Zenodo DOIs in the datastore come either
from the Sandbox or the Production server, which makes testing a single new
archive on its own a hassle, and adds complexity across the whole application
with switches for sandbox vs. not-sandbox data sources.

This commit removes this requirement, and allows a mix of sandbox and production
DOIs to be used in development.

I also removed some very sparse documentation about how to create an archive in
the Datastore by hand, which I think was very old and probably no longer supported
and certainly not being tested, since it seemed likely to confuse and frustrate
anyone who actually tried to do it.

There's a unit test which checks that all DOIs are production, rather than sandbox
to make it difficult to accidentally check in code that refers to unofficial
input data.

docs/dev/datastore.rst, after:

.. _datastore:

===============================================================================
Working with the Datastore
===============================================================================

The input data that PUDL processes comes from a variety of US government
agencies. However, these agencies typically make the data available on their
websites or via FTP without planning for programmatic access. To ensure
reproducible, programmatic access, we periodically archive the input files on
the `Zenodo <https://zenodo.org/communities/catalyst-cooperative/>`__ research
archiving service maintained by CERN. (See our `pudl-archiver
<https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl-archiver>`__ repository on GitHub
for more information.)

When PUDL needs a data resource, it will attempt to automatically retrieve it from
Zenodo and store it locally in a file hierarchy organized by dataset and the
versioned DOI of the corresponding Zenodo deposition.

The ``pudl_datastore`` script can also be used to pre-download the raw input data in
bulk. It uses the routines defined in the :mod:`pudl.workspace.datastore` module. For
details on what data is available, for what time periods, and how much of it there
is, see the PUDL :doc:`/data_sources/index`. At present the ``pudl_datastore`` script
downloads the entire collection of data available for each dataset. For the FERC Form
1 and EPA CEMS datasets, this is several gigabytes.

For example, to download the full :doc:`/data_sources/eia860` dataset
(covering 2001-present) you would use:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pudl_datastore --dataset eia860

For more detailed usage information, see:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pudl_datastore --help

The downloaded data will be used by the script to populate a datastore under
the your ``$PUDL_INPUT`` directory, organized by data source, form, and DOI::

    data/censusdp1tract/
    data/eia860/
    data/eia860m/
    data/eia861/
    data/eia923/
    data/epacems/
    data/ferc1/
    data/ferc2/
    data/ferc60/
    data/ferc714/

If the download fails to complete successfully, the script can be run repeatedly until
all the files are downloaded. It will not try and re-download data which is already
present locally.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adding a new Dataset to the Datastore
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We maintain a tool at `pudl-archiver
<https://www.github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl-archiver>`__ that manages the
archival and versioning of datasets. See the `documentation
<https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl-archiver#adding-a-new-dataset>`__
for information on adding datasets to the datastore.


Tell PUDL about the archive
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once you have used pudl-archiver to prepare a Zenodo archive as above, you
can make the PUDL Datastore aware of it by updating the appropriate DOI in
:class:`pudl.workspace.datastore.ZenodoFetcher`. DOIs can refer to resources from the
`Zenodo sandbox server <https://sandbox.zenodo.org>`__ for archives that are still in
testing or development (sandbox DOIs have a prefix of ``10.5072``), or the
`Zenodo production server <https://zenodo.org>`__ server if the archive is ready for
public use (production DOIs hae a prefix of ``10.5281``).
