docs/dev/dev_setup.rst, before:

.. _dev_setup:

===============================================================================
Development Setup
===============================================================================

This page will walk you through what you need to do if you want to be able to
contribute code or documentation to the PUDL project.

These instructions assume that you are working on a Unix-like operating system (MacOS
or Linux) and are already familiar with ``git``, GitHub, and the Unix shell.

.. warning::

    While it should be possible to set up the development environment on Windows, we
    haven't done it. In the future we may create a Docker image that provides the
    development environment. E.g. for use with `VS Code's Containers extension
    <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers>`__.

.. note::

    If you're new to ``git`` and `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ , you'll want to
    check out:

    * `The Github Workflow <https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/>`__
    * `Collaborative Development Models <https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-collaborative-development-models>`__
    * `Forking a Repository <https://help.github.com/en/articles/fork-a-repo>`__
    * `Cloning a Repository <https://help.github.com/articles/cloning-a-repository/>`__

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Install mambaforge
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We use the ``mamba`` package manager to specify and update our development
environment, preferentially installing packages from the community maintained
`conda-forge <https://conda-forge.org>`__ distribution channel. We recommend
using `mambaforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge#mambaforge>`__ rather than
it's ``conda`` equivalent
`miniconda <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`__ or the large pre-defined
collection of scientific packages bundled together in the Anaconda Python distribution
because it's faster.

After installing your package manager, make sure it's configured to use
`strict channel priority <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-channels.html#>`__
with the following commands:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mamba update mamba
    $ conda config --set channel_priority strict

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fork and Clone the PUDL Repository
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unless you're part of the Catalyst Cooperative organization already, you'll need to
fork `the PUDL repository <https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl>`__
This makes a copy of it in your personal (or organizational) account on GitHub that
is independent of, but linked to, the original "upstream" project.

Then, `clone the repository <https://help.github.com/articles/cloning-a-repository/>`__
from your fork to your local computer where you'll be editing the code or docs.
This will download the whole history of the project, including the most recent
version, and put it in a local directory where you can make changes.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Create the PUDL Dev Environment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inside the ``devtools`` directory of your newly cloned repository, you'll see
an ``environment.yml`` file that specifies the ``pudl-dev`` ``conda``
environment. You can create and activate that environment from within the
main repository directory by running:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mamba update mamba
    $ mamba env create --name pudl-dev --file devtools/environment.yml
    $ mamba activate pudl-dev

This environment installs the ``catalystcoop.pudl`` package directly using the code in
your cloned repository so that it can be edited during development. It also installs all
of the software PUDL depends on, some packages for testing and quality control, packages
for working with interactive Jupyter Notebooks, and a few Python packages that have
binary dependencies which can be easier to satisfy through ``conda`` packages.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updating the PUDL Dev Environment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You will need to periodically update your development (``pudl-dev``) conda
environment to get you newer versions of existing dependencies and
incorporate any changes to the environment specification that have been
made by other contributors. The most reliable way to do this is to remove the
existing environment and recreate it.

.. note::

    Different development branches within the repository may specify their own
    slightly different versions of the ``pudl-dev`` conda environment. As a
    result, you may need to update your environment when switching from one
    branch to another.


If you want to work with the most recent version of the code on a branch
named ``new-feature``, then from within the top directory of the PUDL
repository you would do:

.. code-block:: console

    $ git checkout new-feature
    $ git pull
    $ mamba deactivate
    $ mamba update mamba
    $ mamba env remove --name pudl-dev
    $ mamba env create --name pudl-dev --file devtools/environment.yml
    $ mamba activate pudl-dev

If you are working with locally processed data and there have been changes to
the expectations about that data in the PUDL software, you may also need to
regenerate your PUDL SQLite database or other outputs. See :doc:`run_the_etl`
for more details.

.. _linting:

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Set Up Code Linting
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We use several automated tools to apply uniform coding style and formatting
across the project codebase. This is known as
`code linting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)>`__, and it reduces
merge conflicts, makes the code easier to read, and helps catch some types of
bugs before they are committed. These tools are part of the ``pudl-dev`` conda
environment and their configuration files are checked into the GitHub
repository. If you've cloned the pudl repo and are working inside the pudl conda
environment, they should be installed and ready to go.

Git Pre-commit Hooks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Git hooks let you automatically run scripts at various points as you manage
your source code. "Pre-commit" hook scripts are run when you try to make a new
commit. These scripts can review your code and identify bugs, formatting
errors, bad coding habits, and other issues before the code gets checked in.
This gives you the opportunity to fix those issues before publishing them.

To make sure they are run before you commit any code, you need to enable the
`pre-commit hooks scripts <https://pre-commit.com/>`__ with this command:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pre-commit install

The scripts that run are configured in the ``.pre-commit-config.yaml`` file.

.. seealso::

    * The `pre-commit project <https://pre-commit.com/>`__: A framework for
      managing and maintaining multi-language pre-commit hooks.
    * `Real Python Code Quality Tools and Best Practices <https://realpython.com/python-code-quality/>`__
      gives a good overview of available linters and static code analysis tools.

Code and Docs Linters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
`Flake8 <http://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/>`__ is a popular Python
`linting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)>`__ framework, with a
large selection of plugins. We use it to check the formatting and syntax of
the code and docstrings embedded within the PUDL packages.
`Doc8 <https://github.com/PyCQA/doc8>`__ is a lot like flake8, but for Python
documentation written in the reStructuredText format and built by
`Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`__. This is the de-facto
standard for Python documentation. The ``doc8`` tool checks for syntax errors
and other formatting issues in the documentation source files under the
``docs/`` directory.

Automatic Formatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
We are using the the `black <https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ code formatter
and style. It's automatically applied by oure pre-commit hooks, and can probably be
integrated directly into your code editor.  Similarly `isort
<https://isort.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ automatically groups and orders Python
import statements in each module to minimize diffs and merge conflicts. Note that both
``isort`` and ``flake8`` need to be set up to work well with ``black`` -- but those
configurations are stored in the PUDL repository, so you should be able to point your
editor at those configuration files (``tox.ini`` and ``pyproject.toml``) to get
everything acting consistently.

Linting Within Your Editor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
If you are using an editor designed for Python development many of these code linting
and formatting tools can be run automatically in the background while you write code or
documentation. Popular editors that work with the above tools include:

* `Visual Studio Code <https://code.visualstudio.com/>`__, from Microsoft (free)
* `Atom <https://atom.io/>`__ developed by GitHub (free), and
* `Sublime Text <https://www.sublimetext.com/>`__ (paid).

Each of these editors have their own collection of plugins and settings for working
with linters and other code analysis tools.

.. seealso::

    `Real Python Guide to Code Editors and IDEs <https://realpython.com/python-ides-code-editors-guide/>`__

.. _install-workspace:

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Creating a Workspace
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

PUDL Workspace Setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

    If you used ``pudl_setup`` to set up your pudl workspace already,
    skip ahead to :ref:`Legacy PUDL Setup`. If you haven't setup
    a PUDL workspace before, read the remainder of this section.

PUDL needs to know where to store its big piles of inputs and outputs.
The ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` and ``PUDL_INPUT`` environment variables let PUDL know where
all this stuff should go. We call this a "PUDL workspace".

First, create a directory to store local caches of raw PUDL data. You can put
this anywhere, but we put this in ``~/pudl_input`` in the documentation.
Then create an environment variable called ``PUDL_INPUT`` to store the path to
this new directory:

.. code-block:: console

    $ echo "export PUDL_INPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_input" >> ~/.zshrc # if you are using zsh
    $ echo "export PUDL_INPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_input" >> ~/.bashrc # if you are using bash
    $ set -Ux PUDL_INPUT /absolute/path/to/pudl_input # if you are using fish shell

The directory stored in ``PUDL_INPUT`` contains versions of PUDL's
raw data archives on Zenodo for each datasource:

.. code-block::

    pudl_input/
    ├── ferc1/
    │   ├── 10.5281-zenodo.5534788/
    │   │   ├── datapackage.json
    │   │   ├── ferc1-1994.zip
    │   │   ├── ferc1-1995.zip
    │   │   └── ...
    │   ├── 10.5281-zenodo.7314437/
    │   │   └── ...
    │   └── ...
    ├── eia860/
    │   └── ...
    └── ...

.. warning::

    The data stored at the ``PUDL_INPUT`` directory can grow to be dozens
    of gigabytes in size. This is because when the raw data are updated,
    a new version of the archive is downloaded to the ``PUDL_INPUT``
    directory. To slim down the size you can always delete
    out of date archives the code no longer depends on.

Next, create a directory to store the outputs of the PUDL ETL. As above, you
can put this anywhere, but typically this is ``~/pudl_output``. Then, as
with ``PUDL_INPUT``, create an environment variable called ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` to
store the path to this new directory:

.. code-block:: console

    $ echo "export PUDL_OUTPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_output" >> ~/.zshrc # zsh
    $ echo "export PUDL_OUTPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_output" >> ~/.bashrc # bash
    $ set -Ux PUDL_OUTPUT /absolute/path/to/pudl_output # fish

The path stored in ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` contains all ETL outputs like
``pudl.sqlite`` and ``hourly_emissions_epacems.parquet``.

**Make sure you create separate directories for these environment variables!
It is recommended you create these directories outside of the pudl repository
directory so the inputs and outputs are not tracked in git.**

.. _Legacy PUDL Setup:

PUDL Workspace Setup (legacy method)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In previous versions of PUDL, the ``pudl_setup`` script created workspace directories.
PUDL is moving towards using the ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` and ``PUDL_INPUT`` environment
variables instead of the ``pudl_setup`` script because the environment variables are
easier to reference in the codebase.

.. note::

    If you set up your workspace using ``pudl_setup`` you don't need to change
    anything about your setup. Just re-run ``pudl_setup`` and a new directory
    called ``output/`` will be created in your <PUDL_DIR>. You will need to
    point ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` at this new directory and ``PUDL_INPUT`` at the
    ``data/`` directory in <PUDL_DIR>.

.. warning::

    In a future release the ``pudl_setup`` command will be removed.

The ``pudl_setup`` script lets PUDL know where to store inputs and outputs.
The script will not create a new directory based on your arguemnts, so make
sure whatever directory path you pass as <PUDL_DIR> already exists.

.. code-block:: console

    $ pudl_setup <PUDL_DIR>

<PUDL_DIR> is the path to the directory where you want PUDL to do its
business -- this is where the datastore will be located and where any outputs
that are generated end up. The script will also put a configuration file called
``.pudl.yml`` in your home directory that records the location of this
workspace and uses it by default in the future. If you run ``pudl_setup`` with
no arguments, it assumes you want to use the current working directory.

The workspace is laid out like this:

==================== ==========================================================
**Directory / File** **Contents**
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``data/``            Raw data, automatically organized by source, year, etc.
                     This is the path ``PUDL_INPUT`` can point to.
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``parquet/``         `Apache Parquet <https://parquet.apache.org/>`__ files
                     generated by PUDL.
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``settings/``        Example configuration files for controlling PUDL scripts.
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``sqlite/``          :mod:`sqlite3` databases generated by PUDL.
==================== ==========================================================

Commit message:

export env variable changes to current session

docs/dev/dev_setup.rst, after:

.. _dev_setup:

===============================================================================
Development Setup
===============================================================================

This page will walk you through what you need to do if you want to be able to
contribute code or documentation to the PUDL project.

These instructions assume that you are working on a Unix-like operating system (MacOS
or Linux) and are already familiar with ``git``, GitHub, and the Unix shell.

.. warning::

    While it should be possible to set up the development environment on Windows, we
    haven't done it. In the future we may create a Docker image that provides the
    development environment. E.g. for use with `VS Code's Containers extension
    <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers>`__.

.. note::

    If you're new to ``git`` and `GitHub <https://github.com>`__ , you'll want to
    check out:

    * `The Github Workflow <https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/>`__
    * `Collaborative Development Models <https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-collaborative-development-models>`__
    * `Forking a Repository <https://help.github.com/en/articles/fork-a-repo>`__
    * `Cloning a Repository <https://help.github.com/articles/cloning-a-repository/>`__

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Install mambaforge
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We use the ``mamba`` package manager to specify and update our development
environment, preferentially installing packages from the community maintained
`conda-forge <https://conda-forge.org>`__ distribution channel. We recommend
using `mambaforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge#mambaforge>`__ rather than
it's ``conda`` equivalent
`miniconda <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`__ or the large pre-defined
collection of scientific packages bundled together in the Anaconda Python distribution
because it's faster.

After installing your package manager, make sure it's configured to use
`strict channel priority <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-channels.html#>`__
with the following commands:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mamba update mamba
    $ conda config --set channel_priority strict

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fork and Clone the PUDL Repository
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unless you're part of the Catalyst Cooperative organization already, you'll need to
fork `the PUDL repository <https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl>`__
This makes a copy of it in your personal (or organizational) account on GitHub that
is independent of, but linked to, the original "upstream" project.

Then, `clone the repository <https://help.github.com/articles/cloning-a-repository/>`__
from your fork to your local computer where you'll be editing the code or docs.
This will download the whole history of the project, including the most recent
version, and put it in a local directory where you can make changes.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Create the PUDL Dev Environment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inside the ``devtools`` directory of your newly cloned repository, you'll see
an ``environment.yml`` file that specifies the ``pudl-dev`` ``conda``
environment. You can create and activate that environment from within the
main repository directory by running:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mamba update mamba
    $ mamba env create --name pudl-dev --file devtools/environment.yml
    $ mamba activate pudl-dev

This environment installs the ``catalystcoop.pudl`` package directly using the code in
your cloned repository so that it can be edited during development. It also installs all
of the software PUDL depends on, some packages for testing and quality control, packages
for working with interactive Jupyter Notebooks, and a few Python packages that have
binary dependencies which can be easier to satisfy through ``conda`` packages.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updating the PUDL Dev Environment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You will need to periodically update your development (``pudl-dev``) conda
environment to get you newer versions of existing dependencies and
incorporate any changes to the environment specification that have been
made by other contributors. The most reliable way to do this is to remove the
existing environment and recreate it.

.. note::

    Different development branches within the repository may specify their own
    slightly different versions of the ``pudl-dev`` conda environment. As a
    result, you may need to update your environment when switching from one
    branch to another.


If you want to work with the most recent version of the code on a branch
named ``new-feature``, then from within the top directory of the PUDL
repository you would do:

.. code-block:: console

    $ git checkout new-feature
    $ git pull
    $ mamba deactivate
    $ mamba update mamba
    $ mamba env remove --name pudl-dev
    $ mamba env create --name pudl-dev --file devtools/environment.yml
    $ mamba activate pudl-dev

If you are working with locally processed data and there have been changes to
the expectations about that data in the PUDL software, you may also need to
regenerate your PUDL SQLite database or other outputs. See :doc:`run_the_etl`
for more details.

.. _linting:

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Set Up Code Linting
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We use several automated tools to apply uniform coding style and formatting
across the project codebase. This is known as
`code linting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)>`__, and it reduces
merge conflicts, makes the code easier to read, and helps catch some types of
bugs before they are committed. These tools are part of the ``pudl-dev`` conda
environment and their configuration files are checked into the GitHub
repository. If you've cloned the pudl repo and are working inside the pudl conda
environment, they should be installed and ready to go.

Git Pre-commit Hooks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Git hooks let you automatically run scripts at various points as you manage
your source code. "Pre-commit" hook scripts are run when you try to make a new
commit. These scripts can review your code and identify bugs, formatting
errors, bad coding habits, and other issues before the code gets checked in.
This gives you the opportunity to fix those issues before publishing them.

To make sure they are run before you commit any code, you need to enable the
`pre-commit hooks scripts <https://pre-commit.com/>`__ with this command:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pre-commit install

The scripts that run are configured in the ``.pre-commit-config.yaml`` file.

.. seealso::

    * The `pre-commit project <https://pre-commit.com/>`__: A framework for
      managing and maintaining multi-language pre-commit hooks.
    * `Real Python Code Quality Tools and Best Practices <https://realpython.com/python-code-quality/>`__
      gives a good overview of available linters and static code analysis tools.

Code and Docs Linters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
`Flake8 <http://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/>`__ is a popular Python
`linting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)>`__ framework, with a
large selection of plugins. We use it to check the formatting and syntax of
the code and docstrings embedded within the PUDL packages.
`Doc8 <https://github.com/PyCQA/doc8>`__ is a lot like flake8, but for Python
documentation written in the reStructuredText format and built by
`Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`__. This is the de-facto
standard for Python documentation. The ``doc8`` tool checks for syntax errors
and other formatting issues in the documentation source files under the
``docs/`` directory.

Automatic Formatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
We are using the the `black <https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ code formatter
and style. It's automatically applied by oure pre-commit hooks, and can probably be
integrated directly into your code editor.  Similarly `isort
<https://isort.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ automatically groups and orders Python
import statements in each module to minimize diffs and merge conflicts. Note that both
``isort`` and ``flake8`` need to be set up to work well with ``black`` -- but those
configurations are stored in the PUDL repository, so you should be able to point your
editor at those configuration files (``tox.ini`` and ``pyproject.toml``) to get
everything acting consistently.

Linting Within Your Editor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
If you are using an editor designed for Python development many of these code linting
and formatting tools can be run automatically in the background while you write code or
documentation. Popular editors that work with the above tools include:

* `Visual Studio Code <https://code.visualstudio.com/>`__, from Microsoft (free)
* `Atom <https://atom.io/>`__ developed by GitHub (free), and
* `Sublime Text <https://www.sublimetext.com/>`__ (paid).

Each of these editors have their own collection of plugins and settings for working
with linters and other code analysis tools.

.. seealso::

    `Real Python Guide to Code Editors and IDEs <https://realpython.com/python-ides-code-editors-guide/>`__

.. _install-workspace:

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Creating a Workspace
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

PUDL Workspace Setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

    If you used ``pudl_setup`` to set up your pudl workspace already,
    skip ahead to :ref:`Legacy PUDL Setup`. If you haven't setup
    a PUDL workspace before, read the remainder of this section.

PUDL needs to know where to store its big piles of inputs and outputs.
The ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` and ``PUDL_INPUT`` environment variables let PUDL know where
all this stuff should go. We call this a "PUDL workspace".

First, create a directory to store local caches of raw PUDL data. You can put
this anywhere, but we put this in ``~/pudl_input`` in the documentation.
Then create an environment variable called ``PUDL_INPUT`` to store the path to
this new directory:

.. code-block:: console

    $ echo "export PUDL_INPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_input" >> ~/.zshrc # if you are using zsh
    $ echo "export PUDL_INPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_input" >> ~/.bashrc # if you are using bash
    $ set -Ux PUDL_INPUT /absolute/path/to/pudl_input # if you are using fish shell

The directory stored in ``PUDL_INPUT`` contains versions of PUDL's
raw data archives on Zenodo for each datasource:

.. code-block::

    pudl_input/
    ├── ferc1/
    │   ├── 10.5281-zenodo.5534788/
    │   │   ├── datapackage.json
    │   │   ├── ferc1-1994.zip
    │   │   ├── ferc1-1995.zip
    │   │   └── ...
    │   ├── 10.5281-zenodo.7314437/
    │   │   └── ...
    │   └── ...
    ├── eia860/
    │   └── ...
    └── ...

.. warning::

    The data stored at the ``PUDL_INPUT`` directory can grow to be dozens
    of gigabytes in size. This is because when the raw data are updated,
    a new version of the archive is downloaded to the ``PUDL_INPUT``
    directory. To slim down the size you can always delete
    out of date archives the code no longer depends on.

Next, create a directory to store the outputs of the PUDL ETL. As above, you
can put this anywhere, but typically this is ``~/pudl_output``. Then, as
with ``PUDL_INPUT``, create an environment variable called ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` to
store the path to this new directory:

.. code-block:: console

    $ echo "export PUDL_OUTPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_output" >> ~/.zshrc # zsh
    $ echo "export PUDL_OUTPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_output" >> ~/.bashrc # bash
    $ set -Ux PUDL_OUTPUT /absolute/path/to/pudl_output # fish

The path stored in ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` contains all ETL outputs like
``pudl.sqlite`` and ``hourly_emissions_epacems.parquet``.

**Make sure you create separate directories for these environment variables!
It is recommended you create these directories outside of the pudl repository
directory so the inputs and outputs are not tracked in git.**

Also, activate profile changes above in the current session.

.. code-block:: console

    $ export PUDL_OUTPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_output 
    $ export PUDL_INPUT=/absolute/path/to/pudl_input

.. _Legacy PUDL Setup:

PUDL Workspace Setup (legacy method)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In previous versions of PUDL, the ``pudl_setup`` script created workspace directories.
PUDL is moving towards using the ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` and ``PUDL_INPUT`` environment
variables instead of the ``pudl_setup`` script because the environment variables are
easier to reference in the codebase.

.. note::

    If you set up your workspace using ``pudl_setup`` you don't need to change
    anything about your setup. Just re-run ``pudl_setup`` and a new directory
    called ``output/`` will be created in your <PUDL_DIR>. You will need to
    point ``PUDL_OUTPUT`` at this new directory and ``PUDL_INPUT`` at the
    ``data/`` directory in <PUDL_DIR>.

.. warning::

    In a future release the ``pudl_setup`` command will be removed.

The ``pudl_setup`` script lets PUDL know where to store inputs and outputs.
The script will not create a new directory based on your arguemnts, so make
sure whatever directory path you pass as <PUDL_DIR> already exists.

.. code-block:: console

    $ pudl_setup <PUDL_DIR>

<PUDL_DIR> is the path to the directory where you want PUDL to do its
business -- this is where the datastore will be located and where any outputs
that are generated end up. The script will also put a configuration file called
``.pudl.yml`` in your home directory that records the location of this
workspace and uses it by default in the future. If you run ``pudl_setup`` with
no arguments, it assumes you want to use the current working directory.

The workspace is laid out like this:

==================== ==========================================================
**Directory / File** **Contents**
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``data/``            Raw data, automatically organized by source, year, etc.
                     This is the path ``PUDL_INPUT`` can point to.
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``parquet/``         `Apache Parquet <https://parquet.apache.org/>`__ files
                     generated by PUDL.
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``settings/``        Example configuration files for controlling PUDL scripts.
-------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
``sqlite/``          :mod:`sqlite3` databases generated by PUDL.
==================== ==========================================================
