===============================================================================
EIA Form 860
===============================================================================

.. list-table::
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 0
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Source URL
     - https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/
   * - Source Description
     - The status of existing electric generating plants and associated equipment in
       the United States and those scheduled for initial commercial operation within 10
       years of the filing.
   * - Respondents
     - Utilities
   * - Source Format
     - Microsoft Excel (.xls/.xlsx)
   * - Source Years
     - 2001-2020
   * - Size (Download)
     - 182 MB
   * - PUDL Code
     - ``eia860``
   * - Years Liberated
     - 2001-2020
   * - Records Liberated
     - ~1 million
   * - Issues
     - `Open EIA 860 issues <https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aeia860>`__


Background
^^^^^^^^^^

The Form EIA-860 collects utility, owner, plant, and generator-level data from existing
and planned entities with one or more megawatt of capacity. The form also contains
information regarding environmental control equipment and construction cost data from
2013-2018.

* :download:`EIA-860 Instructions (PDF, to 2013-10-31)
  <eia860/eia860_instructions_2013-10-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-860 Instructions (PDF, to 2017-05-31)
  <eia860/eia860_instructions_2017-05-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-860 Instructions (PDF, to 2020-03-31)
  <eia860/eia860_instructions_2020-03-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-860 Instructions (PDF, to 2023-05-31)
  <eia860/eia860_instructions_2020-03-31.pdf>`

As of 2019, the EIA-860 Form is organized into the following schedules:

* **Schedule 1:** Identification
* **Schedule 2:** Power plant data
* **Schedule 3:** Generator information
* **Schedule 4:** Ownership of generators
* **Schedule 6:** Boiler information

(Schedule 5 contained generator construction cost information)

Who is required to fill out the form?
-------------------------------------

Respondents include all existing and proposed plants that have a total generator
nameplate capacity (sum for generators at a single site) of 1 Megawatt (MW) or greater
and are connected to the local or regional electric power grid. Annual responses are due
between the beginning of January and the end of February.

Jointly owned plants must be reported only once by their operator or planned operator.

What does the original data look like?
--------------------------------------

Approximately a year after respondents submit their form, the EIA publishes the data in
a series of spreadsheets that reflect the thematic contents of the form. These
spreadsheets can change year-to-year as the questions in the form are updated or as EIA
adopts new formatting standards for their outputs. They are accessible on the `EIA
website <https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/>`__ as downloadable ZIP files
categorized by year. To gain greater insight into year-to-year nuances of the form, we
recommend downloading multiple years of EIA-860 ZIP files and comparing both the Form
and the Form Instructions files. See below for our description of notable irregularities
in the data.

How much of the data is accessible through PUDL?
------------------------------------------------

PUDL currently includes all EIA-860 data stretching back to 2001, the earliest year for
which the data is available. We also periodically integrate the monthly updates to the
generators table published in the EIA-860M. However, we do not currently include the
files pertaining to specific renewable energy resources or interconnection.

Notable Irregularities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In 2012 and 2013, the Form was updated to include specific information about renewable
generators. These new data are not included in PUDL.

Prior to 2009, the Generators table was split into two spreadsheets: one for operating
and one for proposed generation. In 2007 and before, there was an additional file for
proposed changes to existing generation. The latter is excluded from PUDL while the
former is combined into a single table during the transformation process.

EIA 860 includes a table in “Schedule 6: Boiler Information” which is an association
table between boilers and generators. This association is important because in EIA 923
the net generation is reported by generators and the fuel consumption is reported by
boilers - so a good boiler generator association is crucial for understanding heat
rates. Unfortunately, the reported associations are incomplete. We have implemented a
methodology fills in many of the missing links 2014 and later that covers more than 95%
net generation reported in the :ref:`generation_eia923` table. See
`this blog post <https://catalyst.coop/2018/08/07/boiler-generator-associations/>`__ and
:mod:`pudl.transform.eia` for more information.

PUDL Data Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We've segmented the processed EIA-860 data into the following normalized data tables.
Clicking on the links will show you a description of the table as well as
the names and descriptions of each of its fields.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: auto

   * - Data Dictionary
     - Browse Online
   * - :ref:`generators_eia860`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/generators_eia860
   * - :ref:`ownership_eia860`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/ownership_eia860
   * - :ref:`boiler_generator_assn_eia860`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/boiler_generator_assn_eia860
   * - :ref:`plants_eia860`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/plants_eia860
   * - :ref:`utilities_eia860`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/utilities_eia860

We've also created the following entity tables modeled after EIA data collected from
multiple tables.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: auto

   * - Data Dictionary
     - Browse Online
   * - :ref:`boilers_entity_eia`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/boilers_entity_eia
   * - :ref:`generators_entity_eia`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/generators_entity_eia
   * - :ref:`plants_entity_eia`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/plants_entity_eia
   * - :ref:`utilities_entity_eia`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/utilities_entity_eia


PUDL Data Transformations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The PUDL transformation process cleans the input data so that it is adjusted for
uniformity, corrected for errors, and ready for bulk programmatic use.

To see the transformations applied to the data in each table, you can read the
doc-strings for :mod:`pudl.transform.eia860` created for each tables' respective
transform function.
