===============================================================================
EIA Form 923
===============================================================================

.. list-table::
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 0
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Source URL
     - https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/
   * - Source Description
     - Generation, consumption, stocks, receipts
   * - Respondents
     - Electric, CHP plants, and sometimes fuel transfer terminals with
       either 1MW+ or the ability to receive and deliver power to the grid.
   * - Source Format
     - Microsoft Excel (.xls/.xlsx)
   * - Source Years
     - 2001-2020
   * - Size (Download)
     - 256 MB
   * - PUDL Code
     - ``eia923``
   * - Years Liberated
     - 2001-2020
   * - Records Liberated
     - ~5 million
   * - Issues
     - `Open EIA 923 issues <https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aeia923>`__


Background
^^^^^^^^^^

Form EIA-923 is known as the **Power Plant Operations Report**. The data include
electric power generation, energy source consumption, end of reporting period fossil
fuel stocks, as well as the quality and cost of fossil fuel receipts at the power
plant and prime mover level (with a subset of +10MW steam-electric plants reporting
at the boiler and generator level. Information is available for non-utility plants
starting in 1970 and utility plants beginning in 1999. The Form EIA-923 has evolved
over the years, beginning as an environmental add-on in 2007 and ultimately eclipsing
the information previously recorded in EIA-906, EIA-920, FERC 423, and EIA-423 by
2008.

* :download:`EIA-923 Instructions (PDF, to 2013-10-31)
  <eia923/eia923_instructions_2013-10-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-923 Instructions (PDF, to 2015-12-31)
  <eia923/eia923_instructions_2015-12-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-923 Instructions (PDF, to 2017-05-31)
  <eia923/eia923_instructions_2017-05-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-923 Instructions (PDF, to 2020-03-31)
  <eia923/eia923_instructions_2020-03-31.pdf>`
* :download:`EIA-923 Instructions (PDF, to 2023-05-31)
  <eia923/eia923_instructions_2023-05-31.pdf>`

As of 2019, the EIA-923 Form is organized into the following schedules:

* **Schedule 2:** fuel receipts and costs
* **Schedules 3A & 5A:** generator data including generation, fuel consumption and
  stocks
* **Schedule 4:** fossil fuel stocks
* **Schedules 6 & 7:** non-utility source and disposition of electricity
* **Schedules 8A-F:** environmental data

Who is required to fill out the form?
-------------------------------------
Respondents include all all electric and CHP plants, and in some cases fuel transfer
terminals, that have a total generator nameplate capacity (sum for generators at a
single site) of 1 Megawatt (MW) or greater and are connected to the local or regional
electric power grid.

Selected plants may be permitted to report schedules 1-4B monthly and 6-8 annually so as
to lighten their reporting burden. All other respondents must respond to the Form in its
entirety once a year.

What does the original data look like?
--------------------------------------
Once the respondents have submitted their responses, the EIA creates a series of
spreadsheets that reflect themes within the form. These spreadsheets have changed over
the years as the form itself evolves. They are accessible on the `EIA website
<https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/>`__ as downloadable ZIP files categorized
by year. The internal data are organized into excel spreadsheets. To gain greater
insight into year-to-year nuances of the form, we recommend downloading multiple years
of EIA-923 ZIP files and comparing both the Form and the Form Instructions files.

How much of the data is accessible through PUDL?
------------------------------------------------
EIA-923 data stretches back to 1970, and PUDL currently covers all years starting from
2009. Due to a difference in reporting between the older and newer years, the older data
will require more time to integrate. Monthly and year to date releases are not yet
integrated.

In addition, We have not yet integrated tables reporting fuel stocks, data from Puerto
Rico, or EIA-923 schedules 6, 7, and 8.

Notable Irregularities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

File Naming Conventions
-----------------------
The naming conventions for the raw files are confusing and difficult to trace year to
year. Subtle and not so subtle changes to the form and published spreadsheets make
aggregating pre-2009 data difficult from a programmatic standpoint.

Protected Data
--------------
In accordance with the Freedom of Information Act and the Trade Secrets Act, certain
information reported to EIA-923 may remain undisclosed to the public until three months
after its collection date. The fields subject to this legislation include: total
delivered cost of coal, natural gas, and petroleum received at non-utility power plants
and the commodity cost information for all plants (Schedule 2).

Net generation & fuel consumed reported in two separate tables
--------------------------------------------------------------
Net generation and fuel consumption are reported in two separate tables in EIA-923:
in the :ref:`generation_eia923` and :ref:`generation_fuel_eia923` tables. The
:ref:`generation_fuel_eia923` table is more complete (the :ref:`generation_eia923`
table includes only ~55% of the reported MWh), but the :ref:`generation_eia923` table
is more granular (it is reported at the generator level).

Adding to the complexity, nuclear units reporting in the Generation and Fuel table
report each ``nuclear_unit_id`` (the same as the associated ``generator_id``)
separately, while all other generation is broken down by ``report_date``,
``plant_id_eia``, ``prime_mover_code``, and ``energy_source_code``. This means that the
natural primary key for the nuclear records is different from all the other records. To
keep the data well normalized and ensure that we can use the real primary keys for
enforcing database structural constraints, we've thus split out a new
:ref:`generation_fuel_nuclear_eia923` table.

Data Estimates
--------------
Plants that did not respond or reported unverified data were recorded as estimates
rolled in with the state/fuel aggregates values reported under the plant id 99999.

PUDL Database Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
We've segmented the processed EIA-923 data into the following normalized data tables.
Clicking on the links will show you a description of the table as well as the names and
descriptions of each of its fields.

EIA-923 Data Tables
-------------------
These tables contain the bulk data reported in the EIA-923.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: auto

   * - Data Dictionary
     - Browse Online
   * - :ref:`boiler_fuel_eia923`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/boiler_fuel_eia923
   * - :ref:`coalmine_eia923`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/coalmine_eia923
   * - :ref:`fuel_receipts_costs_eia923`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/fuel_receipts_costs_eia923
   * - :ref:`generation_eia923`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/generation_eia923
   * - :ref:`generation_fuel_eia923`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/generation_fuel_eia923
   * - :ref:`generation_fuel_eia923`
     - https://data.catalyst.coop/pudl/generation_fuel_nuclear_eia923


PUDL Data Transformations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The PUDL transformation process cleans the input data so that it is adjusted for
uniformity, corrected for errors, and ready for bulk programmatic use.

To see the transformations applied to the data in each table, you can read the
function level documentation in :mod:`pudl.transform.eia923`.
