===============================================================================
EIA Form 860
===============================================================================

=================== ===========================================================
Source URL          https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/
Source Description  | The status of existing electric generating plants and
                    | associated equipment in the United States, and those
                    | scheduled for initial commercial operation within 10
                    | years of the filing.
Respondents         Utilities
Source Format       Microsoft Excel (.xls/.xlsx)
Source Years        2001-2018
Size (Download)     127 MB
Size (Uncompressed) 247 MB
PUDL Code           ``eia860``
Years Liberated     2009-2018
Records Liberated   ~600,000
Issues              `open EIA 860 issues <https://github.com/catalyst-cooperative/pudl/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aeia860>`__
=================== ===========================================================

Background
^^^^^^^^^^

The Form EIA-860 collects environmental equipment and generator-level data from
extant as well as planned generation entities with one or more megawatts of
capacity. Beginning in 2013, EIA-860 also collects construction cost data.

**Who is required to fill out the form?**

As mandated by Section 13(b) of the Federal Energy Administration Act (FEAA) of
1974 and specified by the Form instructions, respondents include:
"all existing plants and proposed (10-year plans) plants that:

* Have a total generator nameplate capacity (sum for generators at a single site)
  of 1 Megawatt (MW) or greater.
* Where the generator(s), or the facility in which the generator(s) resides, is
  connected to the local or regional electric power grid and has the ability to
  draw power from the grid or deliver power to the grid.

In the case of generators located in Alaska and Hawaii which are not a part of the
North American interconnected grid, generators that are connected to a “public grid,”
meaning a local or regional transmission or distribution system that supplies power
to the public, must be reported on Form EIA-860. The operator or planned operator
of jointly-owned plants should be the only respondent for those ﻿plants."

Annual responses are due between the beginning of January and the end of February.
Failure to respond may result in fines of several thousand dollars per day, depending on
the infraction and the form in question. Under Title 18 U.S.C. 1001, submitting
false information is considered a criminal offense and warrants the highest fine.

**What does the published data look like?**

Once the respondents have submitted their data, the EIA creates a series of
spreadsheets that reflect themes within the form. These spreadsheets have changed
over the years as the form itself evolves. To gain greater insight into year-to-year
nuances of the form, we recommend downloading the EIA-860 zip files for the desired
years from the `EIA website <https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/>`__ and
scrutinizing both the Form and the Form Instructions files.

Notable Irregularities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Raw Data
^^^^^^^^

Where yyyy stands for a given year. Ex: LayoutYyyy = LayoutY2013 or LayoutY2014

+-----------------+--------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| 860 Table Name  | Years Used   | Description                                   |
+=================+==============+===============================================+
| LayoutYyyyy     |              | | A directory of all (published) data elements|
|                 |              | | collected on the Form EIA-860 together with |
|                 |              | | the related description, specific file      |
|                 |              | | location(s), and, where appropriate, an     |
|                 |              | | explanation of codes.                       |
+-----------------+--------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| 1__UtilityYyyyy |              | | Utility-level data for the plants and       |
|                 |              | | generators surveyed in the reporting year.  |
+-----------------+--------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| 2__PlantYyyyy   |              | | Plant-level data for the generators surveyed|
|                 |              | | in all available years.                     |
+-----------------+--------------+-----------------------------------------------+
+-----------------+--------------+-----------------------------------------------+
+-----------------+--------------+-----------------------------------------------+

PUDL Data Transformations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The
